Do you see what I mean? IRA GLASS: Yeah, but you say that as if you're just building them up for what will be the central fact of your life, which is then you're going to quit them. EVAN HARRIS: That's right. The way I see it is that there's sort of like two basic, big, important concepts. OK? And the first one is that nothing lasts forever. There is nothing that you can do that you can keep on doing forever. Nothing. That's it. Period. End of story. And then the other big one is that you have to be doing something. So my feeling is it's better to willfully quit whatever it is and then go on to the next thing that you have to be doing, because you have to be doing something, than to just kind of let things fall apart. EVAN HARRIS: The quitting cycle. In everybody's life, there is something of a quitting cycle. So you can talk about adolescence being a time where people quit listening to their parents. And then maybe in people's mid-to-late 20s, they start quitting places or even quitting people. And then later on in mid-life, I think that there's a little bit of a quitting thing going on, which some people call mid-life crisis, and I would probably call it the mid-life quit. And then for older adults, I think they do quite a bit of quitting, too. I think that they basically quit giving a damn what people think of them and quit worrying about certain things. EVAN HARRIS: There's the quitting cycle and then there's the nature of quitters, which I think is important. I don't think quitters are lazy people necessarily. I mean some quitters are probably lazy, but I don't think that the essential nature of a quitter is to be lazy. I think that the essential nature of a quitter is to be able to cut their losses and move on. Quitting is about being willful. Quitting is about having one's own volition to do whatever. IRA GLASS: Can I ask you to reflect on why it is that you think the word "quitter" has such a pejorative connotation in our culture? Because I think of the last time I saw the word "quitter" and it was a cover of a magazine with Ross Perot on it, when he pulled out of the presidential race. And the word "quitter" was above him. Just the notion of being a quitter was so shameful. That was the message of it.